If Lyft, the ride-sharing service, were a person, I would grab him by the shoulders and shake him while yelling: What the heck is wrong with you! Pull yourself together!

Right now, Lyft is being presented with a rare opportunity that it seems to be completely squandering. As its Goliath-esque competitor, Uber, has made several ethical lapses, customers are seeking a moral alternative, and Lyft seems to fit the bill. But theres a problem: Lyfts cutesy branding is a major turnoff for those who may otherwise make the leap.

Lets start with the icon for its mobile app: a cartoonish pink balloon. Think about this for a moment. A company trying to compete with slick Uber, and an entrenched and querulous taxi industry, has a pink balloon for its app logo. When I see pink balloons, I think of my 6-year-old niece, not multibillion-dollar car services.

Moving along, theres the fuzzy pink mustache that hangs off the front of Lyft cars like zits on a teenagers face. I get the idea from a practical standpoint: The mustache makes it easy to recognize the car picking you up. But like communism, the pink mustache make sense on paper, less so in real life. If the driver cant find you (or vice-versa), you can use this thing called a cellphone to call each other.

Last summer, Lyft seemed to move away from the mustache when it started giving new drivers a pink-and-silver Lyft emblem to put on their windshield. It also provided drivers with a smaller mustache called a cuddlestache that fits on a dashboard.

A cuddlestache? I think the branding team at Lyft may have watched one too many Disney movies. No one wants to show up to a club or meeting, or to pick up a date, in a car with a pink mustache, big or small.

Lyfts overall design just comes across as tacky, said Nick Adler, vice president of Cashmere Agency, a digital marketing and branding company that works with celebrities. Right now, Lyft has this insane opportunity to gain market share. But to do that they need to redesign their entire brand, quickly.

Lyfts affable persona comes, in large part, from the companys cuddly founders, Logan Green and John Zimmer, who both wanted to create an experience more akin to a buddy picking you up, rather than a ride with a pompous driver.

Mr. Zimmer, who graduated from the Cornell University School of Hotel Administration, has said he wanted to offer a friendly transaction between drivers and passengers reminiscent of staying in a boutique hotel.

While Lyft has succeeded with parts of this mission, the company also goes too far with its hokey ideas.

When Lyft started, for example, passengers were told to fist-bump their driver. They were also asked to sit in the front seat as you would with a friend and (gulp) have a conversation with the driver. Im not sure which boutique hotel Mr. Zimmer stays in, but I cant recall the last time I fist-bumped a concierge.

All these socially awkward rituals prevented me from using Lyft for nearly a year. And when I finally got around to using it, I came up with an excuse about being sick and contagious, so I could sit in the back seat and quietly check my email.

Theres a line between playful and juvenile, said Alex Rainert, a mobile app designer and the former head of product at Foursquare. And when youre trying to be a utility that people are counting on, Lyft can go a little too far with the heavy-handed cutesiness. People arent looking for a best friend. They are looking for a safe and quick ride home.

The tech industry was jubilant last month when Lyft sent an email to customers informing them that they could sit in the back seat and wave hello, rather than sit shotgun or rub knuckles.

Erin Simpson, the director of communications at Lyft, said that the earlier gestures were not being scaled back, but that passengers were being given a choice. (Lets try to ignore the fact that the email looked like illustrated scenes from Scooby-Doo.)

At Lyft were very focused on our drivers and passengers, Ms. Simpson said, when I asked if the cutesy branding goes too far. We want people to feel comfortable in a ride.

Whats more important than the branding is the focus on the community and our passengers and drivers, she said, and that can come in many forms.

That said, many passengers have taken to social media sites to complain about being told the opposite. If I have to fist bump a stranger one more time, Ill quit @lyft for good, Michael Jarjour, a San Francisco passenger, wrote on Twitter, days after receiving the email from Lyft.

Lyft, for its part, is clearly trying to take the opposite approach to Uber, and seems to be the rare Silicon Valley company that genuinely cares about its effect on society, and isnt trying to win at any (moral) cost. Its website is a smorgasbord of words like friends and community, with lots of smiling and happy people. Drivers are often friendlier than those at Uber.

Maybe Lyft doesnt realize the opportunity it has right now, or just how imperative it is for the company to survive. Im not saying Lyft needs to completely do away with its warm and fuzzy persona. But if Lyft wants to thrive, it should shave off the cuddlestache, pop the pink balloons and undergo a serious rebranding. And it should drop the fist bump entirely.